look there's crisis care there's drugs
there's lotions potions there's bionics
and robotics phenomenal thank god we
have all that stuff but the reality is
that doesn't re restore health to anyone
so if people worry themselves sick could
they not change the way their brains
create vibration in the body to create
ultimate health or at least start the
healing process absolutely so when you
see people overcome these major health
challenges what's the first thing you
see them do
change your mindset eating food is the
biggest variable in our lives the
biggest
so why not eat the best why not eat
nutrients instead of calories and you
watch your body rebuild and transform
according to medicine some
exercise physiology journal they're
saying that those that ride in a car
greater than 10 hours a week
increase death by cardiovascular disease
48 percent
everybody welcome to health theory
today's guest is dr robert zambroski
he's an author physician functional
medicine practitioner and cancer
survivor he has quite literally written
the book on how to rebuild yourself from
even the most terrifyingly poor state of
health
and that is the thing dr z that i find
the most interesting about your story is
having gone through it and
i think anybody else having been
diagnosed with cancer um
like you were
the temptation is to give up or the
temptation is to think that the best you
can ever hope for is to maybe get back
to zero or some semblance of who you
used to be
but you've gone way beyond where you
started
walk us through that like one just what
exactly happened that landed you with
the cancer diagnosis and then how did
you come out the other side better
so
years ago i mean my world imploded
you know i had an avalanche of stress
a relationship fell apart it was pretty
caustic i had somebody personally i had
my front desk person stealing from me
the feds got involved there was drugs
involved all of that
and it was literally all at once my
typical mo as i grew up i always held
things in so i didn't express myself so
it was always this gut-wrenching stress
that i don't know why i just didn't go
to somebody to get help it was just like
i'll figure it out maybe it was the guy
thing i'll figure it out i'll figure it
out
and i didn't right and so just like a
lot of people do when they they go
through major stressors they
self-medicate i couldn't sleep i had
diarrhea i was my stomach was upset i
mean i was i was literally out of my
mind with stress so i medicated myself
with a booze to put myself to sleep i
was eating crappy food i was always on
the run
and that didn't work and so i'm so
shocked exactly
and so um the smoke cleared the
relationship end the house is back to
normal the the the person who was who
was stealing the the the law took care
of that
and so my life seemed to come back in
order
but about 18 months maybe two years
later i started to lose weight i didn't
feel good
my energy just tanked
and i knew something was wrong but i
just kept chalking it up to maybe it's
adrenal fatigue maybe there was
something there i just burned myself out
with and one morning i woke up and my
left pupil was the size of a golf ball
and i said now i'm dying i need to like
jump into this
so i had blood work done and believe it
or not nothing in the blood work really
showed anything and so i went to a
friend because i started to get pounding
headaches when i bent over and he says
just come in the office let's take a
shot chest
picture of your chest chest x-ray
and so we took a shot and he leaves the
room and he says let me let me just i'm
going to redo that and i know this
radiologist's good friend he never does
that so now my
you know
hair on the back of my neck is standing
up and i'm like oh so he comes back in
and he puts the film up because you got
a five inch tumor in your chest
so the reality became you know as i
think back about it people
jump into the fear-based thing
immediately it wasn't fear for me tom it
was anger
anger over what anger because i was
a major contributor a player in the
develop my own disease
and as i say
many diseases are self-inflicted which
they really are yes there's genetic
components when we get all that but
the majority of the time it's what we do
and don't do it ourselves whether it's
ignorance or just innocence if you will
like things happen so i didn't take care
of myself stress as we know stress is a
major player in it all that just ripped
to shreds my immune system and it just
so happened lymphoma is an immune
dysfunction there's no vitamin that's
going to help me get through it now so
what do i have to do so i do what
everybody else did i i dove into
crisis care
so i had seven months of chemo i had
four weeks of radiation and then to boot
at the end of it all
i said to my medical team i said
now what what do we do with this why
don't we just cut it out of my chest
just saw me open they said well we don't
do that for that type of disease or
tumor behind the sterno medial steinle
tumor
and i said well i'm gonna die either way
why don't we just do it so the surgeon
met with me seven days later and
he opened me up and that was it and it's
funny because when i woke up you know i
when i woke up from the surgery and i'm
looking at the painkillers dangling and
the bloody tubes out of my stomach and
chest
the first thing i thought about my
first thing i thought about when going
through all this says i need to rebuild
myself
all right so i want to get to the
mindset because this is really
interesting okay so
you do the traditional crisis care you
get you
convince them to remove the tumor which
is actually sort of the first really
fascinating part of your story so
the doctors don't want to do it you're
trained so you've been to medical school
so
was that what gave you the courage like
it's pretty hard to look a doctor in the
face and say you think it's dangerous or
a waste of time and yet i would like you
to do it anyway what gave you the
courage to do that is it your
personality type do you think about
mindset like yes what was that one
mindset that
what they were offering in my mind and
my education and my research wasn't
going to work it was more of let's do
something that's not done before right
so
as i encourage people like i did for
myself you need to be your own advocate
and sometimes you need to become your
own expert with whatever the the
situation may be and people are forced
to become their own experts
while major cancer hospitals and disease
hospitals are really
pros at rep you know repairing a bullet
wound and taking an arrow out of your
shoulder sometimes you have to think
outside of the box
and it's those moments where you go
if i go through if i listen to what
you're saying there's a chance i die so
why don't we do something we haven't
done before and if i die on the table at
least it was a cool cause and you have
film and video and whatever
and so yes i think it's part of my
personality because i just don't give up
and if there's a way it's like water
finds its way like i'm water i gotta
find the way
and so it was it really was just a
mindset
how do you talk to people that you work
with now about becoming their own
advocate like how
um i'll use my own words how adversarial
are you like when so my wife um has gone
through a tremendous amount of issues
with her microbiome
and there were definitely times where i
felt like i had to be adversarial to
push the issue and i thought whoa if i
hadn't trained for 15 years as an
entrepreneur learning to overcome
obstacles learning how to persuade
learning how to push learning how to
walk that line between
winning them over and letting them know
like i'm not gonna back down which i'll
say is slightly different than not
giving up like how did you
think about that
many professionals practitioners
whatever the name of the the the the
degree or profession is
people come with a specific set of
lenses they come with a specific set of
lenses that they're trained to follow
so if you go outside of that training
then it becomes quote-unquote maybe
adversarial rather than you saying look
there's got to be a different way
there's got to be something else that
can be had looked at resolved most
treatment for chronic health issues and
disease it's wash rinse repeat you know
it's
wash rinse repeat for cancer and heart
disease and autoimmune things it's
basically the same thing
and for me looking at that i just said
it's just it won't work
and again it was
it was my drive it was my personality
but i think it was also my want to see
what would be different
okay so now this notion of i'm going to
rebuild pops into your head were you
thinking i can actually make myself even
better than i was before or does that
notion come later
well maybe it came a little later but
for me it was like i need to rebuild
myself why did this happen and what can
i do about it to then
reset the internal terrain the
mechanisms the networks in my body so i
don't get sick again
so walk me through that process one
thing
that i think is really interesting is
your mom died of als
and i don't know how knowledgeable you
were about cancer when you walked into
it
but how do you begin a process learning
about cancer learning about als how do
you
become knowledgeable enough to start
this rebuilding to change the internal
terrain to even take ownership of all
this requires a certain level of
understanding of what's going on how do
you approach something that big and
unknown so there it is difficult because
a lot of people don't have the
information that we have i mean i'm in a
clinical setting all day
and so my brain is already geared
towards find mechanism you know i'm
addicted to learning mechanisms
and so for me it was it became a process
process of saying there's always a root
reason why and if you ask the question
why seven times typically you'll kind of
get to the to the answer
can you give us walk us through like the
the y's on that because i've heard this
in in business we use that all the time
the layers of why but if somebody's
never heard that process before what
does it look like so let's say you're
dealing with an end stage pathology you
receive a diagnosis of something okay
the end stage pathology is the absolute
end stage until your brain picks up a
signal something's damaged so even if we
rewind the movie right the end stage
pathology had to be created by systems
pathways mechanisms and if you rewind it
and drill it back then we start to
understand okay what are some of the
players is an inflammatory response was
there an infection was there a nutrient
deficiency or food toxicity was there
something that damaged the genome your
genes to set the stage perhaps for
something
so it really becomes an understanding of
if these are the end stage things how
far do we go back and ask the question
why to create
the evolution of the process so it's
always rewinding the movie to say is
there a starting point we'll just take
me for an example how does a b
lymphocyte develop and mature and how do
what is its functions and all of a
sudden it puts you into these different
mechanisms into these different stages
of the puzzle piece
and then you can really again rewind the
movie and drill it down to say wow so
cortisol for me could have suppressed
natural killer cells
genes can get damaged because of
inflammation and nutrient deficiency
which is probably all happening during
that period of time would then set the
stage for disease
and so whatever the health issue is
people have to focus on not the end
stage diagnosis not the end stage
pathology but why it happens
which really brings up the reason or or
the the mindset of functional medicine
right where
functional medicine really is asking the
question why right why does this disease
occur not just how to treat it but why
is it actually happening exactly look
there's crisis care there's drugs
there's lotions potions there's bionics
and robotics phenomenal thank god we
have all that stuff but the reality is
that doesn't re restore health to anyone
we can if if we have a greater
understanding of why it happens then we
can actually go in and reverse work with
the the
initial mechanisms that created this
cardiovascular disease is an
inflammatory condition yeah you can
stuff a stent in a choreo artery and
take a statin to reduce inflammation
which is really the power of statins and
cholesterol-lowering drugs it's an it's
an anti-inflammatory but what damaged
the artery
ask the questions why
it's in the history it's in the
lifestyle it's in your personality it's
in your cultural behaviors it's all
there it's all there that's super
[__] interesting all right so let's
drill into that
everyone's different totally get it i'm
going to caveat the [__] out of this but
i i really want to give people something
super actionable let's talk lifestyle at
a general level right now the people
watching this many many many of them are
in a state of ill health whether they
realize it or not
most of them have brought that on
themselves
how can people go through the process of
changing their lifestyle so that they're
least likely to get we'll call it the
major killers
so i think to answer your question the
first point and i think it's important
is people have to have a vision for what
they want one you have to have a vision
for what you want maybe you want to get
low fat and lean you want to get ripped
maybe you want to reverse a disease
process maybe you want to resolve a gut
microbiome you have to have in your mind
what you want to have happen
that sets the stage as far as
the mental capabilities to really start
to reverse things
and then as as jack canfield says you
have to just act you have to dive in and
act
and so i encourage people to act and
again when we talk about lifestyle stuff
i don't like the word lifestyle i don't
like the word prevention because it's
there's it's like prevention no because
it's lackluster yes we want to prevent
issues but even if we talk about health
as an abstract concept health is
abstract until you lose it yeah yeah and
so i think if people focus on like the
main things that create good health for
us it puts them in the control seat it
puts them in a path of understanding
what's wrong with themselves and
repairing themselves diet exercise the
mindset does your personality drive your
success of course it does so if people
worry themselves sick could they not
change the way their brains create
vibration in the body to create ultimate
health or at least start the healing
process absolutely so when you see
people overcome these major health
challenges what's the first thing you
see them do
change your mindset that's really
interesting so let's pretend for a
second this is i love that you bring
this in uh i just got my cancer
diagnosis you're my first call what the
[__] do i do
so one we get all the data we got all
the information so if it was like a real
life situation a real thing it's like
let's go through the data what is it
what we can we do
you really have two choices you go
through conventional or you don't and
i'm not gonna ever tell anybody don't go
through do not receive conventional
because it saves lives so i'm gonna go
conventional yeah my mindset's a mess
i'm not taking action
and i need now my plan and i'm
definitely looking for something
prototypical and i'm well aware that
there is no one-size-fits-all but i also
think that there is sort of a a median
of
if you do this it will help the most
number of people first you have to see
the finish line and once you're
comfortable knowing that you will come
out strong with this and be a victor
rather than
believe it that's what you mean by you
have to have a mindset
right if you say beetlejuice three times
he shows up so what what makes you think
that you can't change the way the body
starts to heal as soon as you change
your mindset one we have to encourage
people to change their mindset not worry
just this is a battle that you'll go
through
but millions of people come out
victorious so one it's mindset am i
visualizing absolutely visualizing and
what do i visualize a tumor shrinking me
running a marathon absolutely all above
you visualize like i did these natural
killer cells these white blood cells
natural aggressive white blood cells
that go in and their sole job is to get
rid of cells infected by viruses and
cancer cells that's what they do so for
me the first thing was i'm going to come
through this i'm going to rebuild i'm
going to become victorious the second
thing was i'm going to start visualizing
which i did i'm going to visualize my
body destroying things like nobody's
business like little mini hulks going in
there just destroying things
and then that's when i we create the
protocol that's when we say what are the
biggest influences of all physiology
food and exercise really
and so we
help people and i encourage people to
get rid of foods known to create health
issues gluten
unrefined you know white flours and
sugars
unfermented soys perhaps
gluten white sugar dairy products and so
we we take the offensive things away so
the body can start to do what it needs
to do and the other thing is like if
we're just talking about a cancer
diagnosis if people choose to go through
the conventional route and chemo which
is really toxic and sometimes can be
nasty
what you do and the actions you take can
prevent
the toxicity from from overwhelming
people what's the number one reason why
people stop cancer care toxicity and so
certain foods that you eat make the
chemo more effective certain foods you
eat make
medications and statins more effective
so an
absolute abundance of plant-based
plant-based foods for micronutrients
phytochemicals different things to
regulate gene function reduce
inflammation we also need our
macronutrients our protein carbs and fat
for a slew of different reasons so
people that go through chemotherapy
actually they will develop a lot of
people develop
sarcopenia like when i went through it
people like hey z what happened your ass
is gone what happened to your butt it's
missing i'm like what and so the body
actually will start to devour itself for
fuel sarcopenia is muscle consumption
right yes muscle loss yes yes
muscle loss and so
protein fat carbs include fat with your
meals include three or four protein
sources through the day and plant-based
foods every time you eat so you really
just want to ensure that you're getting
all the different micronutrients
macronutrients and different plant-based
compounds that could really start
setting the stage for healing and there
are some of those compounds i've heard
you talk a lot about like vitamins and
micronutrients and stuff i know you've
talked about mushrooms
you have a list of like superfoods like
what are some of those things that i i
need to be in taking and why
so let's go with the mushroom thing
medicinal mushrooms white white button
mushrooms mataki ganoderma all those
the data really shows that the compounds
there's a sugar in these mushrooms that
activate the natural killer cells we
mentioned
that make them kind of more aggressive
and do a better job
and so if we want to have the immune
system
turn on to destroy disease mushrooms are
a staple mushroom extracts the beta
glucans the carbohydrate the sugar from
them are a staple in driving the immune
response for health
vitamin d is another big one like i i
can't tell you how many people are
vitamin d deficient what do you think is
the perfect number i would say 80 90 to
100 nanograms per milliliter all right
and don't let anybody tell you different
if you look at a reference range like a
standard lab reference range maybe 30 to
100 that's a reference range that's not
a therapeutic range and what does that
have to do with tom
right do you fit in the mass population
of unhealthy people a reference range
and so where do you fit in that
reference range the data shows
therapeutically if you get your vitamin
d levels up to a much higher level it
will regulate inflammation it will
reduce
help regulate b cells and t cells and
immune response vitamin d is another one
do you supplement or try to get it all
from sun i do both
because we can't assume that we're going
to get enough activation the uv
radiation to activate skin to make turn
cholesterol into vitamin d
so i think it's gonna move off vitamin d
can i ask you a weird question this is
always like
so
it especially for northern europeans
it just doesn't seem like we would ever
have that much sun like in the winter we
would be covered up
i'm always hesitant to supplement though
i really would love to be convinced
otherwise but
i'm always a little hesitant to
supplement though vitamin d is the one
supplement i take
but
when would northern europeans be in the
sun that much to drive up into the 80s
well maybe unfortunately not but they
can certainly all over the world we can
certainly eat fatty fish for vitamin d
right we can eat certain food sources
that provide us with the vitamin d the
other thing the other problem that i
typically see is
you may take enough or eat enough foods
with vitamin d but it doesn't show up in
your blood so then you have to be the
detective and say why isn't it going up
is it a different mechanism in the liver
the kidney and so we have to investigate
further but vitamin d can be had from
all your fatty fish it can be certainly
had from sunlight you know nothing
better than sunlight but there's nothing
wrong with supplement i mean why
wouldn't you supplement what does the
definition of supplement mean it's an
add-on
you're paving you're you're patching the
potholes in the road
so nothing substitutes food
can you get vitamin d from grass-fed
beef
there is a certain amount from
from grass-fed beef um there's vitamin d
and eggs there's vitamin d in a lot of
different things you know and again that
just makes a dieting unique to people
because if you and i eat the same foods
we may not get the same effect
will we get the vitamin d in there if we
both had four ounces of grass-fed beef
absolutely how your body is going to
digest it absorb it assimilate it turn
it into vitamin d is then something
different
so your medicinal mushrooms
king vitamin d absolutely
i'm big on cruciferous vegetables so if
people are going to do these three type
of foods or take this advice cruciferous
vegetables if you can break them down
you get bloated and gassy and different
problems with it
crucifers are absolutely the bomb of of
plant-based foods broccoli cauliflower
brussels sprouts you know they have
these compounds these phytochemicals and
one of them being indole-3-carbinol
the data in the research is absolutely
astounding and certain compounds in
plant-based foods make chemo more
effective and don't reduce the
therapeutic effects certain compounds
and plant-based foods even vitamin d
protect us from toxicities protect from
these things so if you were to take
three things or at least ingest things
eat some mushrooms
take in foods that maybe fatty fish that
are high in vitamin d and certainly um
your your cruciferous vegetables and
there's nothing wrong with supplementing
nothing
it's really interesting i know that
people when you were going through chemo
they were calling you the freak because
you were getting like the strongest
chemo but you were
much lower in terms of negative side
effects absolutely and is that from the
protocol that you just described totally
is there you talked about intravenous
vitamin c as well like i'm really
interested for people that haven't seen
your own transformation it's bananas
seeing you like post surgery and then
seeing your physique a couple years
later
dude it's
crazy you like
you don't just have a good physique for
um
a normal person like you have a good
physique for like a 25 year old who's on
t you're 51 yes sir 51
post chemo 10 years cancer free like at
some point it's uh and this is
definitely covered in your book it's not
about getting back to zero it's about
almost i mean now i'm using my own words
but it's like becoming superhuman so
what what does that protocol look like
is it similar is it my mushrooms my
cruciferous vegetables getting my
vitamin d like how do we really now
start pushing were you able to naturally
elevate your testosterone levels like
the amount of muscle you put on is
pretty crazy
yeah and so
i took my health and fitness to a new
level because i wanted to i wanted to
prove that that
my frankenstein ways would build what i
wanted to build what can i do to my body
my health what can i do to my blood work
my testosterone my vitamin d what can i
do to muscle physiology what can i do to
a drop foot what can i do to all those
things did you have droplet i did from
the chemo yep oh [__] so what did you do
for that so that was just again
i exercised i fired muscles that
supported those that area i took
specific nutrients as i said the
medicinal mushrooms i3c the vitamin d
and so the protocol that i basically
used was you know i would eat for
protein sources four or five times a day
small amounts through the day i'd eat
when the sun was out not when the moon
is out i wouldn't be trying to digest
all my food when i'm trying to sleep
i ate tons of plant-based foods knowing
that if i ate those foods i would start
to
introduce micronutrients and different
compounds to help my body like remold
into normal physiology i worked out four
or five days a week 35 40 minutes at a
clip i made sure that i slept seven
eight hours come heller high water i
don't care what the circumstances were i
would sleep and the last big thing for
me was
i pulled the weeds anything that was
negative around me that would cause
stress
gone that's interesting and you know and
again
how did you do that
you have a practice
you're going through chemo
these are not stress-free things
so how how did you and i like the notion
of pulling weeds how did you tend that
garden
i didn't want to get ill again
and i didn't want to have something
influence my biology again
to maybe set the stage for recurrence
remission i hate those words as well but
it just sets the negative mindset up for
people and i'm a driver you know my
mental mindset as i said when i woke up
i'm rebuilding
when i got clear and the tubes are out
and i'm back at the gym
i'm going to take this to a new level so
it's just i wanted to push myself to a
different level each phase i wanted to
do something different
and so as i said the stress is a big
thing and there's no stress people are
like aren't you worried about this that
and money and fun i'm like nope
the house can burn down who cares
i really want to talk about that so is
it is it you're shifting your mindset
and saying i can't worry about that so
i'm pulling this weed oh what if i lose
my practice nope it doesn't matter i'm
pulling that weed uh if you lose a
practice you could lose your house nope
it's fine i'm pulling that weed is it
something like that or
how do you actually
interrupt like using cognitive
behavioral therapy speak how did you
pattern interrupt that stress is a
perception unless it's a physical thing
you break your ankle sunburn you know
those are physical stressors but there's
two things that people need to realize
and that i realize
one stress is a perception the stress
reaction tom is something totally
different like we need to separate the
two if you can change your perception of
the thing that's stressing you out
that's finances you get a new car we
take a ride somebody hits it you're like
oh my god my new car i'm like dude it's
metal let's just go get it fixed you'll
have a new one next week you know so
it's really changing the perception of
how we see things and if we can change
the perception of it
we reduce the stress reaction the
physical part of that like right away
do you meditate i do well i don't i
don't know if i call it meditation but i
i i i sit quietly and i tap into the
universe and maybe that's what do you
mean by that i download i'm downloading
at the gym i'm just i'm just i connect i
connect with
universal laws and energy yeah so for me
i just
when i put my feet on the ground i thank
the universe
god whatever it may be i thank
that that energy source for for me being
alive
i thank it for my intelligence i thank
it for my want to help other people and
so when i plant my feet on the ground
it's the first thing that i do because
it sets the stage from my mindset every
day
every day in the hotel room it doesn't
matter every day because then it just
helps me set my mindset like you want to
have some way to set your mindset so you
don't wake up and just go oh my god i
got all these things happening and then
you're out of your mind your perceptions
are off you start to release stress
hormones you're eating like crap you're
destroying your immune system and here
you go you start to brew disease
so for me it's it's perception
and if i can change my perception daily
i tom i've been through life-threatening
disease i had the green river tapping
with me with a sickle
so stressors for me just become whatever
like whatever
what why would i freak out about
something one that perhaps i can't
control and if i can change my
perception what if i can what if i can
change the stressful situation to
something positive right
yeah i love that okay so we're back to
getting superhuman how do you um
how do you naturally raise your
testosterone levels
good protein for one
how much in fact i meant to ask you that
so it sounds like you would you say that
you eat a vegetable dominant diet would
that be a fair way to say it or yeah
i think i define myself as a varietarian
i make sure i have three four fry
protein sources a day not a giant
brinosaurus burger just enough three to
four ounces throughout the day so i'm
supplying myself with the amino acids
and it's it's plant-heavy in the sense
that i i just love vegetables i love
plant-based foods
and you can think of raw saute all of
them sauteed cooked steamed raw
oil olive oil avocado oil i think is the
bomb avocado avocado avocado oil is barn
on the bomb an equal amount of omega
threes and six it's high in threes and
polyunsaturated fatty acids super
helpful and it's got a good smoke point
so anybody that's going to cook with it
you won't really smoke it and burn it
sometimes with olive oil you can and
then you turn those fats rancid not that
it i mean you'd have to like smoke it to
death to burn it but
just to be safe i just tell people go
cold process go extra virgin whatever it
may be so you're not you're not using a
process-based thing okay right so
cold-pressed
extra virgin
oils is probably your best bet okay yep
and so coming back to the plant
thing i just eat tons of plants because
i like them
and i know when i eat something besides
the 10 15 20 seconds of chewing it up
when i ingest it it's going to do
wonders for me food becomes something
that when you eat it if you just
understood a little bit about what it
did you'd have a different relationship
with food
rather than people developing abnormal
relationships with food with dieting and
fad diets and all those things develop a
good relationship it gives us life we
got 30 feet of tubing that food has to
pass through and eating food is the
biggest variable in our lives the
biggest
so why not eat the best why not eat
nutrients instead of calories and you
watch your body rebuild and transform
so to to build muscle for me to raise my
testosterone levels it's all of that
it's good food it's getting to bed at a
decent hour and not eating carbs at
night
if you eat any kind of refined carb or
you load your belly with even good carbs
at night insulin levels rise growth
hormone or shut off now you're not
activating the
systems to create testosterone
so all you got to do is just eat when
the sun is out and not when the moon is
out don't eat carbs at night and your
testosterone levels rise and then when
you test for them they're high in the
morning which they should be right and
that's when we test for them
so
weight training and people say oh
you know you got your body to an
unrealistic level no one that's not true
but i wanted to take it to a level that
i wanted to to see if i can prove what
i'm saying really works
and the other thing was
resistance training pushes testosterone
aerobic training doesn't maybe there's a
little bit of it does rather than
raising cortisol so why not do some
weight training as a guy
right why not do some weight training
and as women like restore bone health
get testosterone levels up weight
training and resistance training is
high-intensity interval training with
resistance
is
the magic that's where it all happens is
that how you do your hip cardio you do
it with resistance i do it yeah
interesting so you just lift weights
really [__] fast
yes well
fast to the point like i'm not going to
certainly injure myself but you do a set
45 second break do a set add weight 45
second break do another set add weight
because what are we really doing you're
increasing resistance
and you're not taking a huge break in
between yes you need to re-oxygenate and
yes you need to have glycogen come out
of liver and muscle stores and do their
thing all that muscle hypertrophy is
based on stress
so you i want to have hypertrophy happen
which is size and strength
and then to eat during the day eat after
my workout so i create protein synthesis
in the muscle all the time so you're not
tearing yourself down people don't eat
enough then they go to the gym i'm like
that that is the worst thing to do
because then you you elicit a release of
cortisol what does cortisol do shuts
down testosterone production production
and all of a sudden you're doing this
for none
so it's it's it really is it really does
become
i think fairly simple once people have
some tools eat when the sun is out not
when the moon is out don't eat crappy
carbs at night go to the gym
get seven or eight hours of sleep at
night take specific nutrients to to help
repair some of the broken things that
may have happened along the way in your
life
so let's go back to
knowing what to eat um
am i looking for colorful foods am i
eating seeds nuts like what is what is
sort of the breakdown
to be a varietarian as i call myself and
and have fun with people when they come
up with names for themselves you know
and and i i understand why people
i don't want to say create the identity
or label or say i'm a vegan i'm a
vegetarian i understand all the reasons
for all of those things
but sometimes people in my mind develop
that kind of
negative relationship with foods and
then just eating one way while i'll say
to people isn't even as i've written and
rebuild like be a varietarian eat a
whole variety of foods and just don't
eat things proven to damage our bodies
gluten dairy you know as we said white
sugars
so
that becomes eating all your rainbow
colored vegetables all your protein
sources from eggs to chicken to fish
grass fed organic free range
and people will say organic so expensive
it's like maybe but are you are you
worried about expense or you are you
taking your food and what you buy any as
an investment for me it becomes an
investment
so i'm investing in my health not
looking at two two bucks more on a dozen
eggs
and so the fat is kind of the same thing
i just make sure i have fat and i use
salad dressings to get the fat i'm not a
good fat digester based on stool testing
so i'll take enzymes with certain meals
certain meals that aren't super loaded
with fat i don't i just let my body do
its thing
what kind of testing do you do that's
actually really interesting i've never
heard somebody say that they actually
test
their stool for i'm assuming you there's
actual fat in your stool absolutely so
what do you test for what do you test
your blood for what do you test your
stool for
so if
if it's just to kind of get a sense as a
functional profile for people on what
kind of testing what should we do what
are we looking for
general blood work is good as long as
it's specific to the person so as part
of a blood profile you're looking at
hormones you're looking at um
inflammatory markers you're looking to
see if there's any broken pieces of
physiology as far as blood work
only check my blood for three things
what three things did you have wow
that's a tough question yeah buddy i
would definitely look at just general
blood health your white blood cells your
cb complete blood count your white blood
cell count all the just general major
things that are happening in the system
bloods
i would certainly look at inflammatory
markers c-reactive protein
i would look at interleukin-6 i'd look
at tumor necrosis factor those are
things that can be tested for that tell
you
deep-rooted inflammatory things okay and
if those show up tom then you better
investigate why they're elevated
interesting and the last thing that i
would test for
i just do this on everybody is thyroid
values and vitamin d
just because people want to have energy
just because people want to make sure
that their metabolic systems are doing
their job and certainly vitamin d on top
of the blood work which ties into the
thyroid we're looking at hormones we're
looking at cortisol four times in the
day and we're looking at all the
the the the um androgens and other
hormones testosterone estrogen
progesterone and getting a picture of
what that looks like so we have blood
work we have hormone profiling and
certainly stool testing so let's say
somebody decides to go on a keto diet or
something and they're just like it just
my gut doesn't feel right or i eat fatty
foods and my gut gets bloated and i'm in
the bathroom okay so let's run a stool
test because maybe through stool testing
as you mentioned before
what if undigested fat shows up in stool
which can be a problem because you're
not breaking down fats and the
cholesterol that make things in the body
the immune response your cholesterol
your hormones
and let's say somebody comes in and
their hormones are shot maybe because of
their lifestyle and cortisol but what if
they're not digesting fat well
so then absorbing fat
and so we would use stool testing as
another one of those functional panels
blood work hormone profiling stool
testing and now we're getting into the
functional gene testing like gene snip
testing for muscle physiology fat
burning metabolism so there's a
functional foundational
panel that we do with people blood work
stool testing uh hormone profiling and
certain now these gene snips they're
awesome they analyze the different
functional genes that can be influenced
by our lifestyles what we do why are
there particular ones that you think
people should be on the lookout for
no i mean i think it's just
it's it's all done at once so as a big
profile it's not like we're isolating
one thing if if you were anemic and your
homocysteine levels were elevated and i
said wow tom you know maybe you're not
you have like mthfr like this big gene
that the hell is that
the um
mother flipper gene right the uh mthfr
is a gene that if it's we'll just say
broken or doesn't work you don't
metabolize b vitamins well folate b12
maybe b6 and so the the byproduct of
that like exhaust from the combustion of
gasoline is homocysteine and
homocysteine as an inflammatory marker
which we also check for in blood would
say uh oh you're not utilizing b
vitamins well and that could be a
problem for you in the future
homocysteine can elevate and damage
blood vessels
so if people are tired and they're just
not getting enough energy and we say why
don't we run a gene snip
and if homocysteine shows up in just
general blood work then we dig deeper
and that's that's when we uncover some
of these gene things which is pretty
fascinating very interesting all right
you said that you're going to go ham
again this summer you're going to get
i'm assuming yolked you're going to
lean
body composition something you talk a
lot about i love that telling people to
break their obsession with weight and to
think about body composition lean mass
versus fat
um you talk about over fat in your book
which i've actually never heard as a
single uh word before but i thought that
was pretty interesting
walk us through body composition and
then tell us very specifically like what
are you gonna do
to um
get an amazing shape this summer people
are so obsessed with gravity it blows my
mind right so i stepped on the scale and
say oh what did gravity tell you are you
obsessing about gravity or are you
obsessing that weight means ugliness to
someone like if you look at bmi for
somebody a two foot
a five foot five bodybuilder 250 is the
same bmi as a 5 foot 5 person who's
obese at 250. the body composition is
completely different so if we divorce
ourselves from weight we've just gotten
rid of a lot of emotional eating a lot
of of different things and problems that
that
we create as a society for people
looking to become healthy body
composition is really i want to know the
amount of lean tissue to my body fat
and what can i do to tweak that on a
daily basis how do i change my
composition
so i remain lean or build healthy lean
muscle tissue and and get rid of body
fat which is really ultimately what
people want to do not lose weight and so
the play on words is is um we we want to
lose fat and not wait and if you lose
something what do people typically do
when they lose something
find it go find it and so people that
are trying to lose weight and they're
obsessed with gravity they'll get it
back instead of focusing on say i want
to make my my composition improve
and so i tweak my body composition by
eating when the sun is out no carbs at
night i make sure my growth hormone was
flowing through my bloodstream while i
fall asleep i get seven to eight hours
no white lights in the room or blue
lights so i shut off and i really do
shut off so you control alt delete while
you're sleeping
so you need to reboot those systems as
well and then the magic really does
happen
and so my routine for working out
becomes i'll hit the gym
my hit the gym my hit the gym hard is
somebody's different
but that's why you have to create your
own plan right we can't do the same
thing we can't wear the rings
wear the same ring size or we're the i'm
sure it doesn't work that way so we try
to encourage people to create a plan
unique to themselves and my personal
plan becomes
a little bit of cardio high intensity
that interval training but more just
weights why because it i feel better
with it not because i'm a meat head it's
just i like doing it
it makes me feel good it's when i get my
best downloads uh so when you say
downloads is it happening automatically
you feel connected to some higher power
when you're lifting like
so
physical movement for me makes my brain
function better okay and so have you
ever been in a moment where you're
either driving talking to somebody or
where you're doing something and all of
a sudden you're like oh my god
this is what i've been wanting to say or
think about it's a download it's it's a
okay let's call it you know a synaptic
explosion in your brain perfect and so
i'll get these explosions in a good
sense and all of a sudden it's what when
do i see the greatest time that happens
physical movement
it's physical movement because physical
movement drives postural muscles and
joints which all are connected to your
brain then your brain lights up
and so people have to realize you have
to be physically active to keep well and
and live to a ripe old age with no
disease yes we'll age but we want to age
gracefully with no disease
and then fall asleep like the woman on
the titanic right you just fall asleep
and it's over i mean that'd be the ideal
situation
but but people have to also realize if
you're physically inactive there's the
danger yes you have to you have to be
physically active weight trained do
different things to to activate gene
networks and reduce inflammation and
really make these things happen in your
body but what's the crime when you don't
and what happens to your body or anybody
else's body when they don't exercise you
turn on a whole different set of genes
that then start to set the stage for
disease here's a crazy stat according to
medicine some
exercise physiology journal they're
saying that those that ride in a car
greater than 10 hours a week
increase death by cardiovascular disease
48 percent whoa yep and so if we look at
think of we're not me we're
hunter-gatherers we're supposed to be
moving and doing things and if we don't
we're not meant to be on a computer and
be on social media all day we're not we
just do it because it's just society and
culture now but the genes haven't
changed evolutionary
speaking our genes really haven't
changed so we should honor them
and so the body composition is about
certain times of eating when to eat what
to eat what are you doing in the gym
and how many people do so much cardio
that they burn them systems out can
people over exercise
yes 100 can they damage themselves from
exercise for sure of course
but if you create something unique to
you and you see your body changing your
health improve then that's your plan
right everybody's going to make general
recommendations like how much exercising
should people do i don't know that
all kinds of data and research says do
30 minutes a day maybe that's not enough
for some people maybe it's too much what
if you have an impairment or disability
maybe you have a metabolic problem where
you can't do all of that
so i think we just have to be aware that
we have to find what works for us some
people find they lean out with a little
more cardio some people lean out with
weight training i don't you know it's
it's unique to the person but body
composition is based on what we eat when
we eat it hormonal control
and certainly exercising and so that
composition is really important because
as your body fat goes up testosterone
levels drop estrogen levels rise and not
that estrogen is a problem is how the
body manages estrogen
and then all hell breaks loose then we
get inflammation and body fat which
creates more inflammation it's just a
nasty cycle
so
if you were going to because one of the
things you talk about the book is
assessing your health which i think is
really important what should people do
is there like a checklist of questions
that people can ask themselves to assess
where they are
i think this section in in the book and
rebuild was assessing your health was
really setting the stage for someone's
mindset
and not just to set the stage but to
actually have people think about what
they do to themselves and what they
don't do
right and so assessing your health
through questions becomes more of where
do i stand now where am i where am i my
health journey or not what do i need to
think about my future state and what do
i need to think about the state that i'm
in now
for me that became a section or a place
where people can really just be honest
with themselves
because people need to be honest with
themselves because if you're not you're
not going to change
and then you're going to blame somebody
else like me saying you didn't help me
really so is it really that i didn't put
100 into you or that you didn't put 100
into yourself
and so i think that section really does
like drill it home for people that as
you fill it out you're like oh well
maybe i don't or maybe i'm doing these
things but then changes mindset and if
you can reframe your mind you can
certainly rebuild your body right and so
it's it's it's the mindset it's
reframing
um which is important
that section to me is pretty impactful
because we try to help people
clinically like here's tests you can
bring to your doctor to have them do
to give you information about cancer
heart disease autoimmune thyroid
dysfunction hormone problems because at
all it's all one it's all one giant
system working together so the assessing
your health i think is is for me just
became a way to
get people involved right now
because if you don't see your faults you
ain't gonna change right
sadly it's true very very it's true
all right where can people interact with
you and your ideas
so
my website uh dr zambrosky.com
people are interested in rebuilding
themselves certainly with with the book
it's on on every major retailer they can
get it off my website we if people do
download or get the book off my website
we give them a gift
and the gift is a log book
and so part of the things that i did in
my past through my journey was i don't
want to say journaling
but it was writing down what was
changing
and so i thought to myself well why
don't we just give people a cool log
book a journal where they can record
their mental state every day their blood
work when they have it every three
months or whatever it may be so they can
actually track and mark their personal
rebuild and so that's our gift to
whoever it may be
all right if people were only going to
make one change
what would be the one change they could
make that would have the biggest impact
on their overall health that's a tough
question so
to answer that i think
one i mean the biggest thing for me i
think we said this the beginning was
changing a mindset
and you have to have a finish line
already set up in your mind
right so you have to reframe your mind
and then rebuilding your body i don't
think is a difficult thing
and then a couple other things i mean i
think people really need to focus on the
major things like eat well and don't
things that create don't don't eat
things that create inflammation get some
exercise even if it's just a little bit
socialize with people i mean how do you
feel when you're chatting with buddies
or or or your wife or friends or
colleagues there's something about the
connection as well and it's just what
makes us human so there's a mindset to
it there's physical steps i think people
can start to take right away and again i
i don't think there's one thing
but if i were to pick the one thing it's
all mindset it's all just an attitude
it is boom that is a phenomenal period
to this dr z thank you so much thank you
so much that was absolutely wonderful my
pleasure guys if you haven't already be
sure to subscribe and until next time my
friends be legendary take care
but much for watching and being a part
of this community if you haven't already
be sure to subscribe you're going to get
weekly videos on building a growth
mindset cultivating grit and unlocking
your full potential
you